feat: [ADR-071] Cryptography v2 (#18824)
cosmos/cosmos-sdk: docs/architecture/adr-071-cryptography-v2.md

* Design and propose a suitable migration path, ensuring transitions are as seamless as possible.

* Evaluate and decide on the relevance of existing systems and tools, incorporating or deprecating them based on their alignment with the module's new vision.

Developer-Centric Approach

* Prioritize clear, intuitive interfaces and best-practice design principles.
* Improve Developer Experience: Provide tools, samples, and best practices to foster an efficient and user-friendly development environment.

Leverage Extensibility

* Utilize the module's modular design to support a wide range of cryptographic tools, key types, and methods, ensuring adaptability for future technological advancements.
* Integrate support for advanced cryptographic features, ensuring the module's position at the forefront of cryptographic technologies.

Quality Assurance

* Enhanced Test Coverage: Improve testing methodologies to ensure the robustness and reliability of the module.
* Conduct an Audit: After implementation, perform a comprehensive audit to identify potential vulnerabilities and ensure the module's security and stability.

> ## Technical Goals

Reviewer: Is there anywhere I can read more about the limits and issues with the current API that motivates V2? These are all fairly high-level goals.

Author: Sure, you can give a read to the [crypto package](https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/tree/main/crypto) in the sdk code. At its current state adding new curves is virtually impossible without having to do hacks and workarounds. This and also having support for different HW wallets (or any kind of crypto provider 😉 ) in a modular way is also not possible today.

As technical goals, the aim is to create a robust, flexible, and future-proof cryptographic module. This is achieved through the following key points:

Wide Hardware Device & Cloud-based HSM Interface Support:

> * Design a foundational interface for various hardware devices (Ledger, YubiKey, Thales, etc.) and cloud-based HSMs (Amazon, Azure) to cater to both current and future implementations.

Reviewer: I think it would help me understand the different components to have examples of how e.g. a YubiKey would fit these interfaces. Is it a `ICryptoProviderBuilder` or a `ISecureStorage` or both? What algorithm does its `Signer` implement? What do its `GetCipher()` and `GetHasher()` methods return?

One end-to-end concrete implementation example (not the actual code, just a description) would go a long way towards clearing up the intention and facilitating feedback.

Author: The core idea of the `CryptoProvider` interface is that it abstracts out what 'kind' of entity is behind the iface providing the crypto tools. So, let's take a Ledger HW implementation example (the core idea is the same for any type of backend), I'll be basically following [this](https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/blob/ADR/crypto_v2/docs/architecture/adr-071-cryptography-v2.md#introduction-1) diagram:

### `LedgerCryptoProvider` implements `ICryptoProvider`
This is the main API that users (code) will use. From this API, you'll get access to *any* crypto tool that *matches* that backend, this is:
 - `LedgerSigner` implements `ISigner`: this will delegate the entire signing process to the HW, quite similar to what the sdk has today for ledger devices.
 - `LedgerHasher` implements `IHasher`: in this particular device, hashing happens at signing time inside the HW so here this file will implement in code the same hashing logic that the corresponding Ledger does internally.
 - `LedgerVerifier` implements `IVerifier`: here it also makes use of the `LedgerHasher` described above to be able to verify the signed tx.
 - {same idea follows for `LedgerGenerator` and other crypto tools}

So far, we have an API (`LedgerCryptoProvider`) that encapsulates a Ledger device.
Now, could be the case that several LedgerCryptoProvider could exist, each for a different pk. So we need a way to persist AND identify each device to know which implementation to load in memory (in Ledger case could be the serial number for example or a derivation path, just to name a few). The same happens for other devices/providers: they'll need special identifiers and configs (like a cloud-based provider could need a user/pass/url, etc). 

For this, the ADR proposes the creation of another abstraction layer called a `SecureItem`, this iface splits the concepts of WHAT to build, the pk that should be linked to, and WHICH CONFIG should be applied to it at build time, and of course this must be persisted somehow to be reusable. Now, for example let's assume that I want to store all of the above (what to build, id and config) in a json file, in that case I'll create:

### `SecureItemJson` implements `ISecureItem`
Note that this is completely detached from the underlying implementation of the CryptoProvider it points to, this is, I could use the same implementation of `SecureItemJson` to store how to build a LedgerCryptoProvider or a `YubiCryptoProvider`  as well.

So now we have a way to persist all this info in the form if SecureItems, so next step is to have a 'vault' to store this items:

### `FSSecureStorage` implements `ISecureStorage`
Let's suppose I want to store this items in a local FS. This goes up one level more of abstraction: we split the WHAT we store from the WHERE. Examples here are filesystem, keychain, cloud storage, etc, vaults.

Lastly, since we have the WHAT to build, HOW to identify it, WHICH configs should be applied, HOW it is STORED, and WHERE is is STORED, we're still missing the HOW the CryptoProvider is BUILT:

### `LedgerCryptoProviderBuilder` implements `ICryptoProviderBuilder`
These implementations know how to build the desired provider and how to apply its configs. This is nothing more than a specialized factory pattern for CryptoProviders. Each builder also can create a CryptoProvider from different sources (some could be added/deleted at implementation time): FromSeed, from FromMnemonic, FromSecureItem. The latter will be the most used in runtime since the others are more CLI oriented for UX.

Hope this makes the idea clearer. Happy to give more details if needed.

CryptoProvider <|-- SecureItem

Hasher <|-- CryptoProvider
Verifier <|-- CryptoProvider
Signer <|-- CryptoProvider
Cipher <|-- CryptoProvider
Generator <|-- CryptoProvider
```

### Crypto Provider

*Crypto Providers* serve as a middleware responsible for managing the interaction with various instantiated cryptographic packages. It acts as a centralized controller, encapsulating the API of the crypto modules in a single location.
Through each Crypto provider, users can access functionality such as signing, verification, encryption, and hashing.

By abstracting the underlying cryptographic functionality, *Crypto providers* enable a modular and extensible architecture. It allows users to easily switch between different cryptographic implementations without impacting the rest of the system.

A `CryptoProvider` can be built from different sources, such as a `SecureItem`, a randomness source, a seed, a mnemonic, or a string.
Since the underlying representation of a `CryptoProvider` is a protobuf message, it can be easily serialized and stored in a safe manner.
The storing and retrieval is handled by a `SecureStorage` implementation which will be presented in the next section.

```go

> type ProviderMetadata interface {

Reviewer: Interfaces can't have fields. Was this meant to be a struct?

Author: Yep! typo, thanks!

  key string
  value string
}

type ICryptoProviderMetadata interface {

>   GetTypeUUID() TypeUUID

Reviewer: Is TypeUUID documented anywhere?

Author: Seems that is missing in this ADR version, but the idea is to have a fixed ID that identifies the underlying provider (could be a string + some versioning, this for sure will be changed in implementation time)

  GetName() string
  GetMetadata() []ProviderMetadata
}

> type ICryptoProviderBuilder interface {

Reviewer: Are these interfaces meant to be implemented by modules outside the SDK? If so, you should consider that you can't add methods without breaking backwards compatibility. That means `ICryptoProviderBuilder` and `ICryptoProvider` are not extensible to other operations or sources that don't fit one of the existing methods.

Author: `ICryptoProviderBuilder` would likely not change that much since it's the provider factory, shouldn't involve crypto specifics in its code. 
And regarding `ICryptoProvider`, all the possible getters (GetCipher, GetHasher, etc) should be defined in this interface. 
What getter you think we should add to cover more backends?

  ICryptoProviderMetadata
  
  FromSecureItem( item SecureItem ) (ICryptoProvider, error)  

  FromRandomness( source IRandomnessSource ) (ICryptoProvider, error)
  FromSeed( seed []byte ) (ICryptoProvider, error)
  FromMnemonic( mnemonic string ) (ICryptoProvider error)
  FromString( url string ) (ICryptoProvider error)
}

type ICryptoProvider interface {
  Proto.Message
  ICryptoProviderMetadata
  

>   GetKeys() (PubKey, PrivKey, error)

Reviewer: If I understand correctly, an ICryptoProvider implementation is backed by a specific keypair, correct?

What do its Cipher and Hasher represent then? What algorithm do they implement?

Author: yes, each crypto provider is associated to a keypair in the SecureItem struct, like described in https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/pull/18824#discussion_r1562781586

  GetSigner() (ISigner, error)
  GetVerifier() (IVerifier, error)
  GetCipher() (ICipher, error)
  GetHasher() (IHasher, error)
}
```

#### Signing

Interface responsible for signing a message and returning the generated signature.

```go
type ISigner interface {

>   Sign(Blob) (Signature, error)

Reviewer: This interface has no space for parameters. Does it mean the precise algorithm is defined as part of the `SecureItem`? That's good but it should be explicitly documented, as it can be limiting when trying to use the same key with different algorithms (which is generally best avoided, but you should make sure it's not necessary for legacy reasons).

Author: Correct, the (fixed) params will be stored in the SecureItem struct. Sure, this all will be documented in detail once we have a working demo app.

}
```

#### Verifier

Verifies if given a message belongs to a public key by validating against its respective signature.

```go
type IVerifier interface {

>   Verify(Blob, Signature) (bool, error)

Reviewer: Why return both a bool and an error? Most Go verification methods return a sentinel error on invalid signatures.

Author: This is also one of the things that can be polished at implementation/demo time. But the idea is since the `Verify` could also happen remote (think of a remote signer for example), returning an error can be useful to identify errors in the pipeline.

}
```

#### Cipher

A cipher is an api for encryption and decryption of data. Given a message it should operate through a secret.

```go
type ICipher interface {

>   Encrypt(message Blob) (encryptedMessage Blob, error)

Reviewer: This interface doesn't have any way to provide the nonce. Is the idea that it will always be randomly generated? That restricts the supported algorithms to those where that's safe, essentially only XChaCha20Poly1305 and non-standard schemes like XAES-256-GCM (https://github.com/C2SP/C2SP/pull/36).

Author: Good point! So you're proposing that for a more general usage the `Encrypt` func should be something like

` Encrypt(nonce, message Blob) (Blob, error)` ?

  Decrypt(encryptedMessage Blob) (message Blob, error)
}
```

#### Hasher

This package contains the different hashing algorithms and conventions agreed on this matter.

```go

> type IHasher interface {

Reviewer: Why does hashing need to be abstracted into the CryptoProvider? It involves no private keys, and is basically never delegated to hardware modules.

Author: This is not the case in hardware wallets, that receive a plain tx (blob) to sign and not the digest itself. Sending complete blobs (non hashed) to providers allows them to add access control rules, reject/allow based on content, etc

  Hash(input Blob) Blob

>   CanHashIncrementally() bool

Reviewer: How does the incremental API work?

Author: The exact behaviour would be dependant of the actual implementation of `IHasher`.  
The idea behind the `CanHashIncrementally` is to expose the implementation capabilities in the form of 'getters', the incremental hash is only an example of this.

* FileSystem: This implementation stores the items in a designated folder within the file system.
* Memory: This implementation stores the items in memory, providing fast access but limited persistence (for testing purpose mainly).
* KMS: This implementation utilizes the Key Management System available on AWS, GCP, etc.
* others: 1password, OS-integrated secure storage (macOS, Linux, Windows)

```go
type ISecureStorage interface {
  List() []string

  Get(name string) (SecureItem, error)
  Set(item SecureItem) error
  Remove(name string) error
}
```

### Secure Item

A *Secure Item* is a structured data object designed for storing any type of data within a *Secure Storage* instance.
In the context of this ADR, the `Blob` field of a `SecureItem` represents the serialized form of a `CryptoProvider`.

_Note:_ The encoder/decoder of the `Blob` field will be dependent on the `CryptoProvider` implementation, a `SecureItem`
has no knowledge of the underlying data structure.

```go
type ISecureItemMetadata interface {
  Type()   TypeUUID     // Relates to the corresponding provider
  Name()   string
}

type ISecureItem interface {
  ISecureItemMetadata

>   Bytes() []byte

Reviewer: The docs above speak of a `Blob`. Was the return value meant to be a `Blob`?

Author: The idea is to make `ISecureItem` and `ISecureStorage` 100% independent from any type not related to this package. This would be translated into a cleaner imports list (and easier to maintain/upgrade)

}
```

##### Keyring

The `Keyring` interface serves as a central hub for managing `CryptoProviders` and `SecureStorage` implementations.
The main difference with the current `Keyring` interface is that it adds the ability to register several `SecureStorage` (this is, several "storing backends") implementations and the
_values_ are abstracted as `SecureItem` instead of `Record`.

```go
type IKeyring interface {
  RegisterCryptoProviderBuilder(typeUUID TypeUUID, builder CryptoProviderBuilder)
  RegisterAndLoadStorageProvider(typeUUID TypeUUID, provider StorageProvider)

>   ListStorageProviders() ([]IStorageProvider, error)

Reviewer: `IStorageProvider` is not defined anywhere. Is it an old name for `SecureStorage`?

It also serves as a convenient API for:

* Signing and Verifying messages
* Generating addresses out of keys

_Note:_ Each Wallet implementation should provide the logic to map addresses and PubKeys.

```go
type Wallet interface {
	Init(Keyring)
	GetSigner(address string) Signer
	GetVerifier(address string) Verifier
	Generate() string
}
```

#### Additional components

##### **Blob**

This is a wrapper for the widely used `[]byte` type that is used when handling binary data.
Since handling sensitive information is a common task in crypto algorithms, the objective is to provide some extra security capabilities around such type as:

* Zeroing values after a read operation.
* Proper data handling.

#### **Pub/Priv Key**

PubKey and PrivKey are wrappers to store the corresponding keys bytes.
The corresponding implementations will have the proper security measures to handle the keys mentioned at the beginning of this document.

```mermaid
classDiagram
  PubKey <|-- PrivKey
  PubKey : Address() string
  PubKey : Key 

  PrivKey : PubKey() PubKey
  PrivKey : key
```

Base key interface (common to private and public keys)

```go

> type BaseKey interface {

Reviewer: What's the use of BaseKey? Applications should be able to just use PubKey instead.

Author: Yes but take into account that in the proposed design, `Pubkey` extends `Basekey`, same with `Privkey` with the advantage that in the latter we can extend it to have data zeroing or 'references' to remote privkeys without having it in memory.

* Initial basic PKCS#11
  https://docs.oasis-open.org/pkcs11/pkcs11-base/v3.0/os/pkcs11-base-v3.0-os.pdf
  https://docs.aws.amazon.com/cloudhsm/latest/userguide/pkcs11-library.html
* https://docs.aws.amazon.com/cloudhsm/latest/userguide/pkcs11-key-types.html
* https://solanacookbook.com/references/keypairs-and-wallets.html#how-to-generate-a-new-keypair
* https://www.nist.gov/news-events/news/2022/07/nist-announces-first-four-quantum-resistant-cryptographic-algorithms
* https://blog.cloudflare.com/nist-post-quantum-surprise/
* https://pkg.go.dev/crypto#Hash
* https://cheatsheetseries.owasp.org/cheatsheets/Password_Storage_Cheat_Sheet.html

## Appendix

### Tentative Primitive Building Blocks

This is a tentative list of primitives that we might want to support.
This is not a final list or comprehensive, and it is subject to change.
Moreover, it is important to emphasize the purpose of this work allows extensibility so any other primitive can be added in the future.

* digital signatures
    *  RSA (PSS)
    *  ECDSA (secp256r1, secp256k1, etc.)
    *  EdDSA (ed25519, ed448)
    *  SR25519
    *  Schnorr
    *  Lattice-based (Dilithium)
    *  BLS (BLS12-381, 377?)

> * encryption

Reviewer: This is a very broad category, it includes AEADs, unauthenticated symmetric encryption, asymmetric encryption, and key encapsulation mechanisms. Are they all meant to be abstracted into `ICipher`? That's likely to lead to misuse, both because they are not interchangeable and because it is hard to make them fit a single interface.

    * AES (AES-GCM, AES-CCM)
    * RSA (OAEP)
    * salsa20
    * (x)chacha20 / (x)ChaCha20-Poly1305 (AEAD)

>     * Dilithium

Reviewer: I assume this was meant to be Kyber, as the KEM based on some of the same primitives as Dilithium?

Reviewer: (Note that I would recommend waiting for ML-KEM and ML-DSA to be standardized this summer.)

Author: Thanks for the recommendation! That's a tentative list of signatures that might be implemented after the basic architecture gets implemented. The idea is in the first major release to support only the curves and algos that are currently in the sdk's code + some implementation to serve as examples.
For sure this list will get refined, and most important, anyone will be able to add new signatures in a modular way.

    * Ntru

* Hashing
    * sha2 / sha3
    * RIPEMD-160
    * blake2b,2s,3
    * Keccak-256 / shake256

>     * bcrypt / scrypt / argon2, Argon2d/i/id

Reviewer: I recommend against merging regular and password hashes. They have very different uses, and should never be used interchangeably. An abstraction over the two encourages developer to mistakenly use one for the other.

Author: Noted. Thanks

### Glossary

1. **Interface**: In the context of this document, "interface" refers to Go's interface concept.

2. **Module**: In this document, "module" refers to a Go module. The proposed ADR focuses on the Crypto module V2, which suggests the introduction of a new version of the Crypto module with updated features and improvements.

3. **Package**: In the context of Go, a "package" refers to a unit of code organization. Each proposed architectural unit will be organized into packages for better reutilization and extension.

## Context

In order to fully understand the need for changes and improvements to the cryptographic package, it's crucial to consider the current state of affairs:

* The Cosmos SDK currently lacks a comprehensive ADR for the cryptographic package.
* Type leakage outside the current crypto module pose backward compatibility and extensibility challenges.
* The demand for a more flexible and extensible approach to cryptography and address management is high.
* Architectural changes are necessary to resolve many of the currently open issues.

> * There is a current tread towards modularity in the ICF stack (e.g. runtime modules)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* There is a current trend towards modularity in the Interchain stack (e.g. runtime modules)
```

Interface considerations

* Design should take into considerations support for Trusted Platform Module (TPM) 2.0 and similar devices to anticipate future enhancements.

* Design should take into account the Cryptographic Token Interface Standard (PKCS#11)

Increase cryptographic versatility

* Support for a broad spectrum of cryptographic techniques
* Extend support for more hash functions (e.g. pedersen, argon2, Argon2d/I/id, Blake3, etc.)
* Extend support for more signature schemes (e.g. secp256r1, ed25519, ed448, sr25519, etc.)
* More advanced methods ( Post-Quantum Cryptography (PQC) methods
* Threshold signatures and encryption

Community Engagement Infrastructure:

* Structure the design with tools and documentation interfaces in mind, enabling a seamless future rollout of resources for developer engagement.

## Proposed architecture

### Introduction

In the proposed architecture, each package is decoupled and isolated. Adding new implementations consist of implementing the required interfaces.

```mermaid
classDiagram

Keyring <|-- Wallet

SecureStorage <|-- Keyring
SecureItem <|-- SecureStorage
CryptoProvider <|-- SecureItem

Hasher <|-- CryptoProvider

> Verifier <|-- CryptoProvider

Reviewer 2: how come client side code needs to have a hasher, verifier and cipher? i might be missing the usecase

Author: The idea is that the `CryptoProvider` has the entire crypto toolchain available. Maybe on the specific case of the sdk's `/client` might not be directly used but for example if another zone wants to build something that actually needs a `Verifier` on their client, they have it out of the box without needing to import external packages.

```go
type IKeyring interface {
  RegisterCryptoProvider(typeUUID TypeUUID, builder CryptoProviderBuilder)
  RegisterAndLoadStorageProvider(typeUUID TypeUUID, provider StorageProvider)

  ListStorageProviders() ([]IStorageProvider, error)
  ListCryptoProviders() ([]ICryptoProvider, error)

  List() ([]SecureItemMetadata, error)
  
  GetCryptoProvider(ItemId) (CryptoProvider, error)
}
```

#### **Wallet**

The Wallet interface contains the blockchain specific use cases of the crypto module. It also serves as an API for:

* Signing and Verifying messages.
* Generating addresses out of keys

Since wallet interacts with the user keys, it contains an instance of the Keyring, it is also where the blockchain specific logic should reside.

Note: Each Wallet implementation should provide the logic to map addresses and ItemIds

```go
type Wallet interface {
	Init(Keyring)
	GetSigner(address string) Signer

> 	GetVerifier(address string) Verifier

Reviewer 2: what is the verifier used for here?

	Generate() string
}
```

#### Additional components

##### **Blob**

This is a wrapper for the widely used `[]byte` type that is used when handling binary data. Since crypto module handles sensitive information, the objective is to provide some extra security capabilities around such type as:

* Zeroing values after a read operation.
* Proper data handling.

These blob structures would be passed within components of the crypto module. For example: Signature information

#### **Keys**

A key object is responsible for containing the **BLOB** key information. Keys might not be passed through functions, and it is
suggested to interact through crypto providers to limit the exposure to vulnerabilities.

```mermaid
classDiagram
  PubKey <|-- PrivKey
  PubKey : Address() string
  PubKey : Key 

  PrivKey : PubKey() PubKey
  PrivKey : key
```

Base Key struct

```go
type KeyStruct struct {
 key Blob
}
```

> Base key interface (common to private and public keys)

Reviewer 2: is this meant to replace the current interfaces? if so what is the rationale?

Author: Yes, the idea is to replace the current secp256k1 interface, mainly for 3 reasons:
- the new iface allows us to represent a more general case of asymmetric cryptography, moreover be able to represent not only curves but lattices or pq cryptography. We want to ensure proper extensibility as is one of the main goals of this ADR.
- in some cases, like HSMs/Ledger, the privkey object may not be ven a real instance but a reference to that data  inside the device that is never accessible externally. But to still use that reference inside the SDK, this interface will still serve to represent that data.
- Security wise and also to avoid privkey leakage (that could end up with the gc being an attack target), the interface can implement zeroizing functions to avoid that case.

Reviewer 2: with the advent of x/accounts verification would be handled in the module, not outside like it is today. This would allow us to not need any sort of interface, users would be free to implement what they would like freely. 

the interfaces that this would replace mean that we would need an overhaul of how verification is handled in the entire sdk for current users. This isnt mentioned in the adr nor how it will be done. Can we get an update, maybe a poc on how it could look like, doesnt have to be anything fully working but just how the flow would work.

Author: The x/accounts verification could still use whatever pubkey implementation they need, what we propose is to provide a truly generic interface for pubkeys and privkeys (the latter with the mentioned security improvements) that can be extended to any curve. By doing this on the client side it will avoid having things like :https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/blob/64dbee647087c66634b37b2bdb97e914bf3b77cd/client/tx/factory.go#L468-L471

where the client code depends on a specific curve.

So in short the common intention of the ADR is to provide a better tooling to give a true decoupling to the entire codebase from any crypto related tool/package. If some implementation for x/accounts doesn't want to use this new interface, they'll have the freedom to do so but the risk of having tightly coupled code will still be there.

Reviewer 3: @tac0turtle any to add here?

Reviewer 3: @tac0turtle ?

Reviewer 2: it seems that this adr has nothing to do with state machine but only client side code so the current crypto package would still exist. I think its only solving part of the problem, the rest is being left alone. Will that come in a later PR or is the current crypto package not meant to be touched and continually used?

Author: Could you please elaborate what the rest of the problem would be ?

### Backwards Compatibility

Some packages will need a medium to heavy refactor to be compatible with this ADR. 
In short, packages using _Keyring_ (current SDK) will need to be adapted to use the new Keyring and CryptoProvider interfaces.
Other special cases where a refactor will be needed, are the ones that make use crypto components in isolation like the  _PrivateKey_ and _PublicKey_ structs
to sign and verify transactions respectively.

As first approach, the most affected packages are:
- crypto/types
- client/rpc
- client/tx
- client/keys
- types/tx/signing
- x/auth
- x/auth/client

> - x/slashing

Reviewer 2: if these packages will be affected then we are missing a design in how will these modules get the needed info from the new cryptoprovider. will it get passed down to modules?

> - x/slashing

Author: yep, we have that covered (not in detail for every package though) [here](https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/blob/fb0fba596a34dab665474a39022dba53ee2eb6af/docs/architecture/adr-071-cryptography-v2.md?plain=1#L473-L476).
But the idea is if:
- package uses `keyring`: direct replacement with the new keyring that uses CryptoProvider under the hood
- package signs without using `keyring`: this one will be the most affected. To avoid bleeding privkeys, these pkgs should be refactored to use keyring instead.
- package uses any other crypto tool than sign (hash, enc/dec, etc): [not affected](https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/blob/fb0fba596a34dab665474a39022dba53ee2eb6af/docs/architecture/adr-071-cryptography-v2.md?plain=1#L469).

> - x/slashing

Reviewer 4: tx and signature verification is affected not as a whole but only on the cryptography related stuff. Our proposal aims to decouple stuff. May I ask, how do you see it merging client and state machine?

> - x/slashing

Reviewer 3: @tac0turtle friendly reminder over this discussion

> - x/slashing

Reviewer 3: @tac0turtle cc

> - x/slashing

Reviewer 2: i dont see how things like slashing are affected by this ADR. From my understanding this adr is client only, but the adr mentioned slashing and other modules being affected. This is contradicting and leaving me more confused on the goals and design of this pr

> - x/slashing

Author: The `x/slashing` module is not directly affected by this ADR, but it might be indirectly impacted. This is because several .go files in that package import [crypto/types](https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/blob/86eaeed5199efb2871f49d1928ddbc4dff19edbb/x/slashing/keeper/keeper.go#L15). If these types change, even just their names, it will require changes in that package. The same applies to other packages, mostly in the keeper.go files.

However, there's always the option to maintain the v1 pub/priv-key style for backward compatibility. But considering all the [advantages](https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/pull/18824#discussion_r1440791183) of the new v2 `BaseKey` interface, it might be a good idea to migrate every usage to v2 in subsequent PRs.

This is why we considered appropriate to include these packages in that list, not as an inevitable but a possible impact.
